
- A **context-free grammar** (CFG) is a formal grammar $G=(V,\Sigma,R,S)$ in which each production rule is of the form $A\to w$, where $A\in V$ and $w\in (V\cup \Sigma)^*$.
- Let $G=(V,\Sigma,R,S)$ be a CFG. 
	- If $u,v,w\in(V\cup \Sigma)^*$ and $A\to w$ is a rule, then we say that $uAv$ **yields** $uwv$, written $uAv\Rightarrow uwv$
	- The language $L(G)=\{w\in \Sigma^*\mid S\overset{*}\Rightarrow w\}$ (which is the set of all strings generated by $G$) is called the **language generated by $G$** and is said to be a _context-free language_ (CFL).
	- Given a string $w\in \Sigma^*$:
		- A **derivation** of $w$ in $G$ is a sequence of substitutions of the form:
			- $S\Rightarrow u_1\Rightarrow u_2\Rightarrow \dots \Rightarrow u_n = w$, where each $u_i$ is in $(V\cup \Sigma)^*$
			- If such a derivation for $w$ exists in $G$, we say that $G$ **generates** $w$ (or $S$ **derives** $w$) and write $S\overset{*}\Rightarrow w$
		- $w$ is said to be derived **ambiguously** in $G$ if it has two or more different leftmost derivations.
		- A derivation of $w$ is a **leftmost derivation** if at every step the leftmost remaining variable is the one replaced.
		- The following are equivalent:
			- $w\in L(G)$
			- $S\overset{*}\Rightarrow w$
			- There exists a parse tree for $w$ with respect to $G$
		- A **parse tree** for $w$ with respect to $G$ is a rooted ordered tree in which:
			- The root is labeled by the start variable $S$
			- The leaves are labeled by the symbols of $w$
			- Each internal node is labeled by a variable $A$ and has children labeled $X_1,\dots,X_n$ if $A\to X_1\dots X_n$ is a rule in $G$
		- There is a bijection between the set of left-most derivations of $w$ and the set of parse trees for $w$ with respect to $G$.
	- $G$ is **ambiguous** if it generates at least one string ambiguously.
		- A CFG is ambiguous iff it generates some string with two different parse trees.
	- A CFG is in **Chomsky normal form** if every rule is of the form $A\to BC$, $A\to a$, or $S\to \varepsilon$, where $A,B,C\in V$, $a\in \Sigma$, and $S$ is the start variable, and $B$ and $C$ are not $S$.
		- If $G$ is a CFG in Chomsky normal form, and $w\in L(G)$, then $|w|\leq 2^{|h|}-1$, where $h$ is the height of the parse tree for $w$.
- A language is said to be a **context-free language** (CFL) if it is generated by some CFG.
	- A CFL is **inherently ambiguous** if all CFGs that generate it are ambiguous.
	- Every CFL is generated by a CFG in Chomsky normal form.
	- (2.32) Every regular language is context free.
	- (2.20) A language is context free iff some PDA recognizes it.
- Two CFGs $G_1$ and $G_2$ are said to be **equivalent** if $L(G_1)=L(G_2)$.
	- _Remark_: There can be multiple CFGs that generate the same language, moreoever, some of these may be ambiguous while others are unambiguous.

### Pushdown Automata (PDA)

- A **pushdown automaton** (PDA) is a 6-tuple $M=(Q,\Sigma,\Gamma,\delta,q_0,F)$, where $Q$, $\Sigma$, $\Gamma$, and $F$ are all finite sets, and
	- $Q$ is the set of states
	- $\Sigma$ is the input alphabet
	- $\Gamma$ is the stack alphabet
	- $\delta:Q\times \Sigma_\varepsilon\times \Gamma_\varepsilon\longrightarrow \mathcal{P}(Q\times \Gamma_\varepsilon)$ is the transition function
	- $q_0\in Q$ is the start state
	- $F\subseteq Q$ is the set of accept states
- A pushdown automaton $M=(Q,\Sigma,\Gamma,\delta,q_0,F)$ **accepts** a string $w\in \Sigma^*$ if there exists a sequence of states $r_0,r_1,\dots,r_m\in Q$ and strings $s_0,,s_1,\dots,s_m\in \Gamma^*$ such that:
	- $r_0=q_0$ and $s_0=\varepsilon$
	- For $i=0,1,\dots,m-1$, we have $(r_i,b)\in\delta(r_{i},w_{i+1},a)$, where $s_i=at$ and $s_{i+1}=bt$ for some $a,b\in \Gamma_\varepsilon$ and $t\in \Gamma^*$.
	- $r_m\in F$
- A PDA can be represented using a state diagram, where each transition is labeled by the notation "$a,b\to c$" to denote that the automaton: reads $a$ from the input; pops $b$ from the stack; and pushes $c$ onto the stack.

### CFL to CFG

- Given a CFL $L$, we can construct a CFG $G$ such that $L(G)=L$. #todo 

### CFL to PDA

- Given a CFL $L$, we can construct a PDA $M$ such that $L(M)=L$. #todo 

### CFG to CNF

- Given a CFG $G$ we can construct an equivalent CFG $G'$ in Chomsky normal form 
- #todo theorem 2.9

### DFA to CFG

- Let $M=(Q,\Sigma,\delta,q_0,F)$ be a DFA. We can convert $M$ to a CFG $G=(V,\Sigma,R,S)$ as follows:
	1. Make a variable $R_i$ for each state $q_i\in Q$
	2. Add a rule $R_i\to aR_j$ to the CFG if $\delta(q_i,a)=q_j$
	3. Add a rule $R_i\to \varepsilon$ if $q_i\in F$
	4. Make $R_0$ the start variable of the CFG, where $q_0$ is the start state of $M$