# Reg/DFA/NFA

- (**DFA**) $M=(Q,\Sigma,\delta,q_0,F)$, $\delta:Q\times\Sigma\to Q$
- (**NFA**) $M=(Q,\Sigma,\delta,q_0,F)$, $\delta:Q\times \Sigma_\varepsilon \to \mathcal{P}(Q)$

- (**P.L.**) If $\displaystyle A$ is a regular lang., then $\exists p$ s.t. every string $s\in A$, $|s|\geq p$, can be written as $s=xyz$, satisfying the following:
	- $\forall i\geq 0, xy^iz\in A$
	- $|y|>0$
	- $|xy|\leq p$
- Every NFA can be converted to an equivalent one that has a single accept state.
- (**regular grammar**) $G=(V,\Sigma,R,S)$. Rules: $A\to aB$, $A\to a$ or $S\to \varepsilon$. ($A,B,S\in V$ and $a\in \Sigma$).

|         | NReg | Reg | CFL | TD  | TR  |
| ------- | ---- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Union   |      | ✓   | ✓   | ✓   | ✓   |
| Inter.  |      | ✓   | ✗   | ✓   | ✓   |
| Comp.   | ✓    | ✓   | ✗   | ✓   | ✗   |
| Concat. |      | ✓   | ✓   | ✓   | ✓   |
| Star    |      | ✓   | ✓   | ✓   | ✓   |
| Rev.    |      | ✓   | ✓   | ✓   | ✓   |

# CFG

- (**CFG**) $G=(\underset{ \textsf{n.t.} }{ V },\underset{ \textsf{ter.} }{ \Sigma },R,S)$. Rules: $A\to w$. (where $A\in V$ and $w\in (V\cup \Sigma)^*$).
	- A derivation of $w$ is a **leftmost derivation** if at every step the leftmost remaining variable is the one replaced.
	- $w$ is derived **ambiguously** in $G$ if it has at least two different l.m. derivations.
	- $G$ is **ambiguous** if it generates at least one string ambiguously.
	- A CFG is ambiguous iff it generates some string with two different parse trees.
- (**P.L.**) If $L$ is a CFL, then $\exists p$ s.t. any string $s\in L$ with $|s|\geq p$ can be written as $s=uvxyz$, where:
	- $\forall i\geq 0,uv^ixy^iz\in L$ 
	- $|vxy|\leq p$
	- $|vy|>0$
- (**CNF**) $A\to BC$, $A\to a$, or $S\to \varepsilon$, (where $A,B,C\in V$, $a\in \Sigma$, and $B,C\neq S$).
	- If $G$ is a CFG in CNF, and $w\in L(G)$, then $|w|\leq 2^{|h|}-1$, where $h$ is the height of the parse tree for $w$.
	- Every CFL is generated by a CFG in CNF.
- $L$ is **CFL** if it is generated by some CFG.
	- A CFL is **inherently ambiguous** if all CFGs that generate it are ambiguous.
	- Every CFL is generated by a CFG in CNF.
	- Every regular lang. is CFL.
- (**derivation**) $S\Rightarrow u_1\Rightarrow u_2\Rightarrow \dots \Rightarrow u_n = w$, where each $u_i$ is in $(V\cup \Sigma)^*$. (in this case, $G$ **generates** $w$ (or $S$ **derives** $w$), $S\overset{*}\Rightarrow w$)
- (**PDA**) $M=(Q,\underset{ \textsf{input} }{ \Sigma },\underset{ \textsf{stack} }{ \Gamma },\delta,q_0\in Q,\underset{ \textsf{accepts} }{ F }\subseteq Q)$. (where $Q$, $\Sigma$, $\Gamma$, $F$ finite). $\delta:Q\times \Sigma_\varepsilon\times \Gamma_\varepsilon\longrightarrow \mathcal{P}(Q\times \Gamma_\varepsilon)$.
- $M$ **accepts** $w\in \Sigma^*$ if there is a seq. $r_0,r_1,\dots,r_m\in Q$ and $s_0,,s_1,\dots,s_m\in \Gamma^*$ s.t.:
	- $r_0=q_0$ and $s_0=\varepsilon$
	- For $i=0,1,\dots,m-1$, we have $(r_i,b)\in\delta(r_{i},w_{i+1},a)$, where $s_i=at$ and $s_{i+1}=bt$ for some $a,b\in \Gamma_\varepsilon$ and $t\in \Gamma^*$.
	- $r_m\in F$
- A PDA can be represented using a state diagram, where each transition is labeled by the notation "$a,b\to c$" to denote that the PDA: 
	- Reads $a$ from the input (or read nothing if $a=\varepsilon$) 
	- Pops $b$ from the stack (or pops nothing if $b=\varepsilon$)
	- Pushes $c$ onto the stack (or pushes nothing if $c=\varepsilon$)

# CSG

- (**CSG**) $\displaystyle {\textstyle G=(V,\Sigma,R,S)}$. Rules: $S\to \varepsilon$ or $\alpha A\beta \to \alpha \gamma \beta$ where:
	- $\displaystyle \alpha ,\beta \in (V\cup \Sigma \setminus \{S\})^*$
	- $\gamma \in (V\cup  \Sigma  \setminus \{S\})^+$
	- $\displaystyle A\in V$

